chore(blog): summary of the asyncapi mentorship program 2024 (#4292)
asyncapi/website: markdown/blog/2024-mentorship-program-summary.md

---
title: "AsyncAPI Mentorship Program 2024 - Wrap Up"
date: 2025-08-01T06:00:00+01:00
type: Community
tags:
  - Mentorship
  - AsyncAPI
  - OSS
cover: /img/posts/mentorship-assets/gta.webp
authors:
  - name: Azeez Elegbede
    photo: /img/avatars/ace.webp
    link: https://www.linkedin.com/in/aelegbede/
    byline: AsyncAPI Preacher 
excerpt: 'A Story About Growth, Design, Docs, Code, and Community — The 2024 Mentorship Journey'
---

> It doesn't feel like that long ago when we got rejected from participating in GSoC in the summer of 2022, which motivated us to pilot our in-house mentorship program that focuses on encouraging contributors to learn, grow, and contribute to exciting opensource projects while receiving guidance from experienced mentors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It doesn't feel like that long ago when we got rejected from participating in GSoC in the summer of 2022, which motivated us to pilot our in-house mentorship program that focuses on encouraging contributors to learn, grow, and contribute to exciting Open Source projects while receiving guidance from experienced mentors. 
```

Yet, here we are again, wrapping up our third edition of the AsyncAPI Mentorship Program.

> As the 2024 mentorship program concludes, it's a perfect time to reflect on what's been an incredibly rewarding journey for everyone involved. Beyond lines of code and completed tasks, this year's program truly focused on collective learning, personal growth, and building something significant as a community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the 2024 mentorship program concludes, it's a perfect time to reflect on what has been an incredibly rewarding journey for everyone involved. Beyond lines of code and completed tasks, this year's program truly focused on collective learning, personal growth, and building something significant as a community.
```

> The 2024 mentorship program was filled with a blend of challenges, surprises and successes. While it's natural to focus on the external events that shaped our experiences, this time of the year invites us as a community to turn inward and ask more profound questions about how we learned and grew. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 2024 mentorship program was filled with a blend of challenges, surprises, and successes. While it's natural to focus on the external events that shaped our experiences, this time of the year invites us as a community to turn inward and ask more profound questions about how we learned and grew. 
```

## Reflect: Honouring the Lessons of 2024

For us, **reflection isn't just a simple look back; it's about extracting profound meaning and vital insights from our experiences**. As a community, this process of "meaning-making" is absolutely crucial for our continuous growth and development. It's how we learn, adapt, and build a stronger future together.

Let's take a moment and highlight some of our reflections for the 2024 cohort, starting with what we're most proud of and building from there.

### What We're Most Proud Of

> What started as a community wide [Github Discussion](https://github.com/orgs/asyncapi/discussions/1361) transcends into a testament of incredible dedication and involvement from everyone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What started as a community-wide [Github Discussion](https://github.com/orgs/asyncapi/discussions/1361) transcends into a testament of incredible dedication and involvement from everyone.
```

> What started as a community-wide [Github Discussion](https://github.com/orgs/asyncapi/discussions/1361) transcends into a testament of incredible dedication and involvement from everyone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What started as a community-wide [Github Discussion](https://github.com/orgs/asyncapi/discussions/1361) transcended into a testament of incredible dedication and involvement from everyone.
```

> What started as a community-wide [Github Discussion](https://github.com/orgs/asyncapi/discussions/1361) transcended into a testament of incredible dedication and involvement from everyone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What started as a community-wide [GitHub Discussion](https://github.com/orgs/asyncapi/discussions/1361) transcended into a testament of incredible dedication and involvement from everyone.
```

In this cohort, we deliberately expanded our project horizons. We didn't just welcome code-related project ideas; we also opened our doors wide to crucial design and technical writing initiatives.

<Figure
  src="/img/posts/mentorship-assets/ideas.webp"
  caption="In rhythm and code, we speak many tongues—diverse in roots, united in purpose."
  className="text-center"
/>

This strategic expansion is a source of immense pride, strengthening the very fabric of AsyncAPI for years to come. This commitment to broader opportunities yielded impressive results:

> - **Vibrant Community Involvement:** The 2024 Mentorship Program's kickoff discussion garnered involvement from 39 community members, including maintainers, contributors, and mentors. This vibrant participation led to 13 proposed project ideas, encompassing two design and two technical writing concepts. From these, [eight](https://github.com/orgs/asyncapi/discussions/1361#discussioncomment-10819168) distinct projects were selected, meeting all program requirements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Vibrant Community Involvement:** The kickoff discussion garnered involvement from 39 community members, including maintainers, contributors, and mentors. This led to 13 proposed project ideas, encompassing two design and two technical writing concepts. As a result, [eight distinct projects](https://github.com/orgs/asyncapi/discussions/1361#discussioncomment-10819168) were selected, meeting all program requirements.
```

  
- **Strong Success Rates:** The 2024 cohort saw a **77.78% mentee success rate** and **90% project completion**. While one coding and one documentation mentee did not pass, the documentation project still achieved full completion thanks to the outstanding collaboration of the remaining mentees.

![Mentee outcomes by project type](/img/posts/mentorship-assets/chart.webp)

- **Immediate Value in Action:** At AsyncAPI, the impact of contributing is often felt right away, not just in code, but across all areas of the community. This cohort reflected that beautifully. 
  

>   The [Holopin Design Project](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/1306) brought this value to life by creating a community-wide badge to recognize contributors doing great work. It was also used to celebrate all mentees who completed their programs — including the mentee who designed the badge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The [Holopin Design Project](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/1306) brought this value to life by creating a community-wide badge to recognize contributors doing great work. It was also used to celebrate all mentees who completed their programs, including the mentee who designed the badge.
```

>   The [Holopin Design Project](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/1306) brought this value to life by creating a community-wide badge to recognize contributors doing great work. It was also used to celebrate all mentees who completed their programs—including the mentee who designed the badge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The [Holopin Design Project](https://github.com/asyncapi/community/issues/1306) brought this value to life by creating a community-wide badge to recognize contributors doing great work. It was also used to celebrate all mentees who completed their programs — including the mentee who designed the badge.
```

> - **Improved project diversity:** This cohort not only showed us the impact of diversifying project ideas, but also helps us understand that non-code related project can hold equal values in the community as its counterpart. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Improved project diversity:** This cohort not only showed us the impact of diversifying project ideas, but also helped us understand that non-code related projects can hold equal value in the community as their counterparts. 
```

> - **Improved project diversity:** This cohort not just showed us the impact of diversifying project ideas, but also helps us understand that non-code related project can hold equal values in the community as it's counterpart. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Improved project diversity:** This cohort not only showed us the impact of diversifying project ideas, but also helps us understand that non-code related project can hold equal values in the community as its counterpart. 
```

### What surprised us

**Surprises don't just happen; they reveal crucial insights and untapped potential.** This cohort, our biggest revelation was understanding that **mentors require support and guidance, too.**

<Figure
  src="/img/posts/mentorship-assets/surprised.webp"
  caption="Did that catch you off guard? It certainly did us."
  className="text-center"
/>

The 2024 cohort brought to light that even our highly capable volunteer mentors, especially those new to the program, aren't always immediately proficient in every aspect of mentorship. We noted with surprise that some initially struggled with critical tasks like defining project goals, setting milestones, and establishing communication frequencies. Without these clear frameworks, evaluating both technical progress and behavioral growth became challenging for us.

> Another unexpected development was the unfortunate reality of mentor withdrawals. While we typically anticipate and prepare for mentees dropping out due to personal reasons, a mentor's early departure was unprecedented for us.

Reviewer 3: [suggestion]: It would be helpful to mention the mentor that ended up leaving and how it impacted the cohort. That way readers can understand why their departure was a shock.

Author: I don't think it's necessary to mention who the original mentors were, as they stepped away due to personal reasons that I won’t be disclosing in this article. Their departure didn’t affect the program's success, as we had incredible mentors step in and seamlessly carry things forward.

This surprising event served as a powerful reminder: while mentoring is profoundly rewarding, it also presents its own unique challenges and underscores the need for proactive support systems for our mentors.

## Refocus: Setting Our Future Intentions

As we look ahead, we firmly believe that the most significant progress often arises from incremental improvements. We are embracing the concept of **marginal gains** to continually enhance our program. A critical element of this forward movement involves challenging perspectives that no longer serve our evolving goals.

Our assumptions and beliefs profoundly shape our choices, and recognizing their potential limitations has prompted us to thoroughly examine our approach throughout the program's history. This introspection is designed to foster an even more welcoming and inclusive environment.

> Some of the changes coming for the next cohort are as follow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the changes coming for the next cohort are as follows:
```

1. **A New Identity: The AsyncAPI Maintainership Program.** Moving forward, the AsyncAPI Mentorship Program will be formally renamed to the **AsyncAPI Maintainership Program**. This strategic transition reflects a singular, clear objective: to explicitly guide mentees along the path to becoming active AsyncAPI maintainers. This shift will not only impact the depth and type of contributions but is also designed to significantly increase our pool of active maintainers and triagers within the initiative.
   
2. **Official Program Documentation.** We've learned that relying solely on program organizers as the "single source of truth" for critical information is neither sufficient nor sustainable long-term. To address this, we are introducing comprehensive, official program documentation. This resource will empower all participants with readily accessible information, streamlining processes and reducing reliance on individual organizers.
   

> 3. **"Introducing "Sequential Cohorts" instead of program years for Clarity.** Over the years, we've observed that program durations often overlap into the following calendar year – a fact underscored by this very 2024 summary being published in 2025. To eliminate confusion for interested participants and better reflect the continuous nature of our work, future programs will be referred to as 'Cohorts' rather than by year. For example, the next iteration will be known as the **AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - Cohort 4**, not "AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - 2025."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Introducing "Sequential Cohorts" instead of program years for Clarity.** Over the years, we've observed that program durations often overlap into the following calendar year – a fact underscored by this very 2024 summary being published in 2025. To eliminate confusion for interested participants and better reflect the continuous nature of our work, future programs will be referred to as 'Cohorts' rather than by year. For example, the next iteration will be known as the **AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - Cohort 4**, not "AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - 2025."
```

> 3. **"Simply Cohorts" for Clarity.** Over the years, we've observed that program durations often overlap into the following calendar year – a fact underscored by this very 2024 summary being published in 2025. To eliminate confusion for interested participants and better reflect the continuous nature of our work, future programs will be referred to as 'Cohorts' rather than by year. For example, the next iteration will be known as the **AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - Cohort 4**, not "AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - 2025."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. **"Referring to programs by cohorts instead of years" for Clarity.** Over the years, we've observed that program durations often overlap into the following calendar year – a fact underscored by this very 2024 summary being published in 2025. To eliminate confusion for interested participants and better reflect the continuous nature of our work, future programs will be referred to as 'Cohorts' rather than by year. For example, the next iteration will be known as the **AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - Cohort 4**, not "AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - 2025."
```

Reviewer 2: or even more specific 
```suggestion
3. **"Introducing "Sequential Cohorts" instead of program years for Clarity.** Over the years, we've observed that program durations often overlap into the following calendar year – a fact underscored by this very 2024 summary being published in 2025. To eliminate confusion for interested participants and better reflect the continuous nature of our work, future programs will be referred to as 'Cohorts' rather than by year. For example, the next iteration will be known as the **AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - Cohort 4**, not "AsyncAPI Maintainership Program - 2025."
```

  {
    name: 'Aayush Saini ',
    avatar: 'https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/AayushSaini101',
    link: 'https://github.com/AayushSaini101'
  },
  {
    name: 'Mohan Kumar',
    avatar: 'https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/ItshMoh',
    link: 'https://github.com/ItshMoh'
  },
  {
    name: 'Zeel Rajodiya',
    avatar: 'https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/JeelRajodiya',
    link: 'https://github.com/JeelRajodiya'
  },
  {
    name: 'Olumide',
    avatar: 'https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/Oloso-surur',
    link: 'https://github.com/Oloso-surur'
  },
  {
    name: 'Prince Onyeanuna',
    avatar: 'https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/Aahil13',
    link: 'https://github.com/Aahil13'
  },
  {
    name: 'Ezinne Anne Emilia',
    avatar: 'https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/ezinneanne',
    link: 'https://github.com/ezinneanne'
  },
  {
    name: 'Mohammed Mehdi',
    avatar: 'https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/catosaurusrex2003',
    link: 'https://github.com/catosaurusrex2003'
  }
]} />

To the future we innovate, together, one commit at a time! 💜

> Photo by Andrea Piacquadio: https://www.pexels.com/photo/amazed-formal-male-looking-at-laptop-screen-3760809/

> > Photo from independent.co.uk : https://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/tired-fatigue-symptoms-reason-help-tips-b2669575.html

Reviewer 3: This is something to consider @AceTheCreator.
